Go to:
Content
Main menu
Search
to the welcome page

Contact
English
Topics
Submenu from: Topics
Information collection
Careers
Submenu from: Careers
The press
The authority
Submenu from: The authority
open search area
Homepage
Topics
Migration and residence
Immigrants from third countries
The information collection on migration
First steps
First steps in Germany
01/03/2024ArticleMigration and residence

Source: © iStock|Aramyan

This content is also available in

Deutsch
Just arrived in Germany? You need to know the following:

The residents' registration office
Make it in Germany: Working and Living in Germany
Link to the information hotline "working and living in Germany"
Source: © Make it in Germany
Registration with the local residents' registration office (Einwohnermeldeamt) is compulsory in Germany. You must be registered in order to receive a tax identification number, for example. You will need to register within two weeks of taking up residence in an apartment. It is important to require confirmation from your landlord for this purpose. You will receive a registration certificate when you register.

The immigration authorities
If you are a third-country national, you must go to the immigration authority in person after arriving in Germany in order to apply for a residence title. The residence title will be issued according to the purpose of your stay, in the form of an electronic card (electronic residence title).

Health insurance
It is mandatory to have statutory or private health insurance in Germany. The health insurance fund covers the costs of any medical treatment that may be necessary.

Training, education and studying
A variety of learning and educational opportunities are available to your family members who accompany you to Germany. Your dependents can take up training or studies if they meet the relevant requirements; your children can go to school free of charge.

Important information

All children and juveniles living in Germany are required to attend school. Depending on the Federal Land, they usually have to attend a general education school for at least nine years from the age of six onwards. Children and juveniles with disabilities or special educational needs are also able to attend school.

The competent education authority is responsible for deciding on the enrolment of newly-immigrated children. They may also enrol intra-year.

The majority of schools are state-run and thus free of charge.

The following is also important:
Opening a bank account: It makes sense to open a German bank account if you stay for a prolonged period in Germany. This makes it easier to transfer payments, such as rent and wages.
Validation of your driving licence: You can drive in Germany for up to six months with a foreign driving licence. You may be required to acquire a German driving licence after six months.
Logo von Youtube
Aktivierung erforderlich
Wir möchten Sie darauf hinweisen, dass nach der Aktivierung Daten an Vimeo bzw. YouTube übermittelt werden.

Video aktivieren
Further information
Texts and articles
Links
Family
Advice for adults
Integration courses
Print page
Topics
Migration and residence
Integration
Asylum and refugee protection
Return
Service
Service for citizens
Advice at local level
Service for other authorities
Topics - Hotlines
FAQs
Imprint
Data protection
Accessibility
User notes
Sitemap
© 2026 Federal Office for Migration and Refugees.